Amateur radio operator - A person named in an amateur operator/primary license grant in
the FCC ULS database.   An amateur radio station is a station in an Amateur Radio Service consisting
of the apparatus necessary for carrying on radio communications. Hams provide a voluntary
noncommercial communications service to the public, particularly in times of emergency.

There are three classes of licenses, technician, general and amateur extra.  Tests are given by volunteer
examiners (VE's).  You are given a CSCE upon successful completion of the test.  These are good for
1 year (365 days).  There are a minimum of 3 VE's required holding a general class or higher license
to give the technician test.

The FCC (Federal Communications Commission) makes and enforces the rules for the amateur radio
service.  Two of the primary purposes of the amateur radio service are to increase the number of
trained radio operators and electronics experts, and improve international goodwill.

Any transmission that disturbs other communications are referred to as harmful interference.

The ITU is the International Communications Union.  It's primary purpose is to assist in the
management of frequency allocations.  The FCC assigns callsigns in a sequential order.  You can
select your own callsign, such as your initials through the vanity callsign program.  Amateur radio
clubs can request their own callsign by applying through a Club Call Sign Administrator.  There are
special use callsigns in a 1X1 format.  Any licensed amateur may apply to use one on a temporary
basis.  You can operate in foreign countries when there is a reciprocal operating agreement between
the governments.

US callsigns start with the letters, K, W, N, AA-AL and have 1 or 2 letters followed by a number then
1 to 3 letters.  Numbers used are 0-9.  

To be a control operator of an amateur radio station you must be named in the FCC license database or
be an alien with a reciprocal operating permit.  You may operate from anywhere the service is
regulated by the FCC or is covered by a reciprocal operating agreement.  You may only contact other
amateur stations unless authorized by the FCC.

There are occasions when frequencies are assigned on a secondary basis.  What this means is you can
operate on these frequencies providing you do not cause harmful interference to a primary user.  One
of the cool things about amateur radio is the ability to speak to hams in other countries.  You can do
this anytime unless communications are prohibited by either government.

There are some communications that are prohibited by amateur radio.  These are 'communications on
a regular basis that could be reasonably furnished alternatively through other radio services'.


You will receive an amateur station license from the FCC upon successful completion of the radio
exam.  You do not need a license to operate a citizens band or family radio service radio.

Anyone can become an amateur licensee in the US EXCEPT a representative of a foreign government. 
There is no minimum age to be a ham.  Amateur radio licenses are granted by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).  You may begin using your license to transmit as sooon as your
information appears in the FCC ULS database and is normally issued for 10 years.  If your license
expires you have up to 2 years to renew the license before having to retake the tests.  You may not
transmit during this grace period. You may begin transmitting again once the renewal information
shows up in the FCC ULS database.  Your responsibility as a licensee is to ensure your station is
operated in accordance with FCC rules.

The FCC requires you maintain your current mailing address on file with the ULS database.  If mail is
returned to the FCC as undeliverable the FCC may suspend or revoke the license.  You must retain this
address on file so as to receive mail delivery from the FCC by the United States Postal Service.

There are some transmissions that are prohibited on the ham bands.  An amateur station may NEVER
transmit information for reception by the general public.  Amateurs are prohibited from transmitting
music except as incidental to an authorized rebroadcast of space shuttle communications.  You cannot
use codes or ciphers to hide the meaning of a transmitted message EXCEPT when transmitting
controls to space stations or radio control craft.  You may NEVER transmit false or decptive signals. 
You must always identify your station except when sent FROM a space station or to control model
craft.

BROADCASTING is defined as transmissions intended for reception by the general as is prohibited in
the amateur service.  You may not transmit indecent or obscene language. An FCC licensed amateur
station may not be compensated (paid) for use of the station EXCEPT in accordance with Part 97
rules.  You may be compensated if your station sends bulletins or morse code practice when that
station makes those transmissions for at least 40 hours per week.

Repeater occasionally have telephone lines attached for autopatch use.  You may NOT use the
autopatch to call your employer requesting directions to a customers office or any other
communication that could be considered 'business'.  You may discuss the sale of amateur radio
equipment on the ham bands, provided it is not a recurring event.

There is only one correct way to identify your station.  That is by using your callsign.  It should be
stated CLEARLY and slowly.  If you transmit without the use of an FCC assigned callsign you have
created unidentified communications or signals.  You must identify your station every 10 minutes and
at the end of each communication.  When 2 stations are in communications and the contact ends each
station is required to transmit its' assigned callsign.

Repeaters may use voice, morse code or a video image conforming to applicable standards to properly
identify the repeater station.

Occasionally you may want to operate a special event station.  If so you must identify your assigned
callsign at least once per hour as well as identifying the special event callsign no less than every 10
minutes.

Sometimes there are special contests or events where you would attach a special indicator to the end of
your callsign.  These indicators must not conflict with an indicator specified by FCC rules or with a
prefix assigned to another country.  An indicator assigned by the FCC would be AG (Authorized
General) or AE (Authorized Extra).  These would be used until your upgrade information appears in
the FCC ULS database.  Sometimes you may operate at a station whose license class might be less
than yours.  You would identify the station using his callsign followed by your callsign.  However if
you are operating only within that stations priveleges you may use his callsgin only.  Every station,
when operating, must have a control operator.

There may be only ONE amateur operator/primary station license granted to one person.  You may
want to set up your own repeater station.  You must have at least a technician license to be the control
operator of a repeater station.  As the control operator of any station YOU are responsible for the
transmissions of that station.  There must be a control operator whenever a station is transmitting.

There is a place called the control point.  This is the location where the control operator function is
performed.  There are some stations that are 'automatically' controlled, such as repeaters on top of
mountains, space stations.  An automatically controlled station does not require the control operator to
be at the control point.  There are three types of station control permitted and recognized by FCC rules. 
They are local, remote and automatic control.  Local control is where the control operator is actually at
the radio, pushing the PTT button.  Automatic control is in use on a repeater when the control op is not
present and remote control is used when the control op isn't physically at the transmitter but can make
changes to the transmitter.

The simplest definition of a control operator of an amateur station is An operator designated by the
licensee to be responsible for the stations transmissions to assure compliance with 
FCC rules.  If you transmit from another amateurs station both of you are responsible for the proper
operation of the station.  An amateur operating from a station with lesser privileges still retains his
higher privileges, but must identify differently.  However if you are operating as the control operator at
a station with higher privileges you only retain the privilege of your license.

THIRD party traffic is defined as a message sent between two amateur stations for someone else. 
When you are unlicensed and operating the radio you are operating as a third party.

Club licenses may be issued to a group consisting of at least 4 members.

You may operate onboard aircraft only with approval of the pilot in command and NOT using any of
the aircrafts equipment.  And remember the FCC may inspect your station at any time upon request.

You always secure your equipment to ensure no unlicensed individual uses it.  A good way to do this is
to disconnect the power cable and microphone when the equipment is not in use.  Even family
members cannot use your station, unless they are licensed and able to be control operators.  


Operating techniques take some time to learn.  Amateur radio for the most part uses common language
but there are some subtleties. Using the letters CQ (calling any station) followed by your callsign a
couple of times is a great way to find any station with which to talk.  ALWAYS listen first to see if the
frequency is clear.  If you know the station with which you wish to speak use his callsign followed by
your callsign.  If you are answering a general call (CQ) you should state the other stations call
followed by your call, preferably phonetically.  You should always use the ITU (International
Telecommunications Union) phonetic alphabet because the words are internationally recognized
substitues fro letters.  You should avoid using cutesy phrase or word combinations to identify your
station.  They are not easily understood by some operators, especially hams from a different country or
dialect.

If you need to transmit tests of short duration to test antennas or equipment you must identify the
station.  You can do this in any acceptable way, voice, morse code or digital.  Failure to do so results
in an 'illegal unidentified transmission'.  The same ID rules apply for test transmissions, you must
identify every 10 minutes and at the end of the transmission.

Using repeaters is a slightly different procedure.  Rather than calling CQ, just stating your callsign is
adequate.  

We have the ability to use many different frequencies and modes of operation.  If everybody did their
own thing chaos would rule.  Over the years, band plans have been designed by the amateur
community and honored among many different countries.  A band plan is a voluntary guideline,
beyond the divisions of the FCC, for using different operating modes within an amateur band.  They
are voluntary guidelines for the efficient use of the radio spectrum.  

Even repeater frequencies are voluntarily coordinated, by amateurs for amateurs.  Each part of the
country has a recognized frequency coordinating body and they are in charge of the repeater band plan
in your area.  Their primary purpose is to reduce interference and promote proper use of spectrum.  If a
repeater station inadvertently retransmits transmissions in violation of FCC rules the transmitting
station is responsible, not the repeater station.  One way to reduce interference, not just on repeaters
but everywhere, is to use the minimum power necessary to carry out the desired communication.  Not
only does this make sense, but it's the rules!

As a technician licensee you will see mode restricted subbands on the 6, 2 ans 1 1/4 meter bands.  On
6 meters you may transmit CW (more code) only between 50 and 50.1 MHz.  On 2 meters, you may
transmit CW only between 144 and 144.1 MHz.

If there are two or more stations talking and you need to jump in transmit your callsign between breaks
and wait for acknowledgment.  Remember always before operating on a repeater to monitor before
transmitting and keep the transmissions short, identify legally and use the minimum amount of
transmitter power necessary.  Remember that no one has exclusive rights to a frequency.  If two
stations wish to use the same frequency, common sense and courtesy should prevail.  Indecent and
obscene language is prohibited because it is offensive to some, because children may intercept
amateur communications with readily available receiving equipment and because such language is
specifically prohibited by FCC rules.  Amateur operators should always show the utmost courtesy
when on the air.  The use of ethnic or racial slurs reflects a poor image to the public and is offensive to
some people.  By the way there is no 'official' list of prohibited indecent or obscene words.

One of the greatest assets of amateur radio is a good elmer, a ham who helps the newcomer and oldster
alike.  If you hear a newly licensed operator having some on the air trouble, you should contact them
and offer to help with the problem.

There are times when the rules and regulations don't cover a situation.  When this happens good
engineering and amateur practices become the general operating standard.

There are times when your equipment may cause interference.  If you are advised that your station is
interfering with adjacent operations you should check to see if possibly your equipment is generating
spurious or off frequency emissions.  If your neighbor is complaining about you interfering with TV
reception, determine the problem.  If the TV receiver is front end overloading it is the neighbors
responsibility to fix his TV.  Front end overload is caused by strong signals from a nearby source.
However good amateur practice dictates lending a hand since most consumers don't understand how
radio works.  Telephone interference is commonplace also.  Most telephones are not equipped with
adequate interference protection when manufactured.

If you interfere with another stations communications you should properly identify your station and
move to a different frequency.  You may NEVER intentionally interfere with another stations
communications.

There are several ways to reduce interference.  One of the easiest and surest is to use a dummy load
when testing your transmitter.  Another source of interference quite often comes from cable service.  A
break in a cable TV line can allow your signals in to create TV interference when you are transmitting
or you may experience interference from cable leakage.

Remember even when operating under emergency communications NO ONE has exclusive rights to a
frequency unless mandated by the FCC and FCC rules always apply.  There are two groups that
provide emergency communications, RACES (Radio Amateur Civilian Emergency Services) and
ARES (Amateur Radio Emergency Service).  Both organizations provide communications during
emergencies.

DEFINITIONS

Electrical power is measured in watts.  The flow of electrons in a circuit is called current and is
measured in amperes. Current is measured by an instrument called an ammeter.  Current that flows
only in one direction is called direct current.  Current that changes directions routinely is called
alternating current.

Frequency is how often something happens. It is measured in Hertz (cycles per second).

Resistance is measured in ohms and is defined as the opposition to current flow in ordinary conductors
such as wires.

Automobile batteries start on direct current.  The automobile battery normally supplies 12 volts.  EMF
(Electromotive force) is measured by a voltmeter. Electrical circuits need conductors to work.  But
they also need to be insulated from surrounding conductors.  A good electrical conductor is copper
while a good insulator is glass.

The distance a radio wave travels during one complete cycle is called wavelength.  Radio waves vary
in frequency and are measured in Hertz.  Radio waves are generally considered those waves that
oscillate more than 20,000 times per second.  Remember radio waves travel through space at the speed
of light.

One of the hardest things to remember is that the shorter the wavelength is the higher is the frequency. 
The formula for converting frequency to wavelength in meters in wavelength in meters equals 300
divided by the frequency in megahertz. Radio waves are designated by their meter band, so this
formula is one you definitely want to remember.

Sound waves are very similar in their behavior as radio waves. Their frequency range however is 300
to 3000 Hertz.

Remember these:

2 meter band in the US   144-148 MHz
6 meter band in the US    50-54 MHz
70 centimeter band in the US 420-450 MHz
An amateur radio consists of two primary components, a receiver and a transmitter.  The receiver is
used to convert radio waves into the sound waves we hear.  The transmitter is used to convert sounds
from our voice into radio signals.  If these two components are in one box it is called a transceiver. 
All radios utilize energy differently than is supplied from the wall.  The device used to convert the
alternating current from the wall outlet into low voltage direct current is the power supply.  Other
sources of low voltage direct current are batteries.  Currently the longest lasting small batteries are
lithium ion.  One of the most common however, primarily due to cost, is the nickel-cadmium battery. 
Nominal voltage for a fully charged Ni-Cad is 1.2 volts.  You will also run across carbon-zinc
batteries.. These are designed for one use and are not designed to be recharged.

Rechargeable batteries are great to have but need to be maintained.  Inspect batteries for physical
damage and replace if necessary.  They should be stored in a cool, dry location.  A refrigerator works
well for this and they must be given a maintenance recharge every 6 months or so.  For a battery to
maintain a long life current should be drawn from the call at the slowest rate needed.

Ohm's law is the most commonly used formula in electronics.  It states that current (I) equals voltage
(E) divided by resistance ( R)    I=E/R.  You can determine resistance and voltage by moving the parts
around as appropriate.  Resistance equals Voltage divided by current R=E/I and voltage equals current
multiplied by resistance.  E=IR       (Power (P)  = Voltage (E) multiplied by current (I).

For instance if the current in a circuit is 3 amperes through an unknown resistor at 90V the resistance
would be 90V (E) divided by 3 amperes current (I) equals 30 ohms  .

Milli = 1/1000
Mega = 1 million
Giga = 1 billion                   
Micro = 1/1,000,000
Kilo= 1000


A microphone connects to your transmitter and is used to convert the sound waves of your voice to
electrical impulses that can be transmitted on the air.  The radio speaker is connected to your receiver
and is used to convert the electrical impulses received by the receiver to audio you can hear.  If the
speaker and microphone are too close together they can create audio feedback.  A replacement for the
radio speaker is a good set of headphones.  These help you hear in noisy areas.

There are many extra pieces of equipment necessary to make your station safer and better.  One of
those necessary items is a good regulated power supply.  This helps protect your equipment from
voltage fluctuations.  A good high pass,  low pass, or notch filter is used at the transmitter to reduce
spurious emissions.  Notch filters are quite often used on TV receivers to prevent RF overload (the
TV's inability to reject powerful nearby signals).  A terminal node controller (TNC) can convert your
station into a digital station, capable of sending an receiver digital signals such as SSTV (Slow scan
television) RTTY (radioteletype) PSK (phase shift keying) and Packet.  Using digital communications,
such as packet, does not require a microphone.  Today's computers provide sound card inputs and
outputs and can be connected to your radio to produce data (digital) transmissions.
                    
RIT - Receiver Incremental Tuning

Repeaters - Repeaters are devices that can extend the range of mobile and/or low power stations.  They
occasionally use a 'courtesy' tone so others know when your transmission is complete.  The most
important thing to know before attempting to use a repeater is the input and output frequencies of the
repeater.  You should always pause between transmissions to listen for others that may need to break
in or wish to join the conversation.  The input frequency of a repeater is the frequency upon which you
transmit, the output frequency of the repeater is where you listen.

When you listen and transmit on the same frequency it is referred to as operating simplex.  You should
operate simplex when possible to avoid tying up a repeater.  You can determine if simplex operation is
practical by listening to the repeater input.  If you can hear the other station simplex operation might
be possible.  Linked repeater systems tie many repeaters over large areas together.  They can provide
coverage for thousands of square miles and sometimes many different states.  Repeaters are also
required to be coordinated so as to minimize interference between repeater systems.  Also as a repeater
owner you may limit access to your repeater.  A restricted repeater is referred to as a closed repeater.

Fundamental overload is interference caused by a strong nearby source. These can cause telephones to
act as radio receivers.  One of the ways to reduce or eliminate interference is the use of an RF filter on
the telephone.  Televisions occasionally cannot reject strong nearby signals.  If someone tells you your
signals are interfering with their TV you should first check to ensure your station is operating properly
and it is not interfering with your television, making sure your station meets the standard of good
amateur practice.  There are several ways to correct a radio frequency interference problem.  Among
them are the use of snap on ferrite chokes, low and high pass filters, and notch and band pass filters.

Part 15 devices, sometimes called incidental radiators, cannot cause interference.  If you have
interference from a Part 15 device, say from your neighbors home, you should work with your
neighbor to identify the device, politely inform your neighbor of the rules that require him to stop
using the device if it causes interference and check to make certain your station meets the standards of
good amateur practice.  Other forms of interference on your signal could be pick up from your cars
electrical system, RF energy getting into the microphone circuit of your transmitter, being slightly off
frequency, being in a bad location or something as simple as the batteries in your HT being low.

Digital communications are sometimes better than analog signals because of the error correction
ability of digital modes.  There are even amateur stations that can connect you to the internet.  These
are called gateway stations.  One of the programs used to connect stations via the internet is called
echolink.  One of the cool things about echolink is the possibility of DX stations such as Russian
stations showing up on your local 2 meter repeater, an internet linked DX station.  Another internet
protocol is called IRLP (Internet Radio Linking Project).  This is a way to link two or more stations
together via the internet.  Both IRLP and Echolink are VOIP (Voice over Internet) protocols.  Any
licensed amateur may operate via echolink.  Repeater directories and the internet are great places to
find actives nodes using VOIP.  

Voice transmission by radio is referred to as phone transmission.   There are many modes.  The most
common is SSB (single side band), closely followed by FM (frequency modulation) and lastly by AM
(amplitude modulation).  FM is most commonly used on UHF/VHF frequencies and repeaters.  For
weak signal voice work on VHF/UHF SSB is the most common mode.  Of the most common forms of
modulation (CW, FM voice and SSB), CW has the narrowest bandwidth.  SSB has one advantage over
FM.  The SSB signal uses less bandwidth, approximately 2-3 kHz.  An FM signal on the other hand has
a bandwidth between 5 and 15 kHz.  TV signals, referred to as FSTV (fast scan TV) have a bandwidth
of 6 MHZ.

Over the years a practice has emerged to use certain side bands on certain frequencies.  On frequencies
of 14 MHz and above USB or upper side band is used.  For frequencies below 14 MHz LSB or lower
side band is used.

Digital communications modes - packet, RTTY (radioteletype), AMTOR, Clover, PSK (phase shift
keying).  All use digital protocols to communicate a message.  A rapidly growing mode of
communications is APRS (Automatic Position Reporting System).  This interfaces your radio
equipment with a GPS (Global Positioning System Receiver).  There are amateur gateways that get
your information to the internet and websites such as findu.com to see where everyone is.

Another acronym you will likely encounter is NTSC (standard fast scan color television signal).  This
is what you see at home on your regular television.

PSK31 is a fairly new digital protocol.  It is a low rate data transmission that works well in noisy
conditions.  The first digital form of communication and still the only one able to be copied by ear is
CW (morse code).  Sending and receiver morse code should be done at a speed no faster than you can
reliably receive.  Learning morse, even though no longer required, is a great idea.  It connects you with
the history of radio and lets you recognize repeater ID's, when they identify in morse.

One of the things that has crept into our amateur language is Q codes.  Originally designed for use on
CW as abbreviations for common questions or statements, some have become part of our hamspeak. 
One neat thing about Q signals on CW.... no matter what language each operator spoke, the Q signals
got the message through easily, almost like a universal translator from Star Trek!  Some common Q
signals are QRM (interference from other stations), QSY (changing frequency), QSL (message
received), QRZ (who's calling?), QTH (location), QRN (natural or man made noise).  Adding a ? To
the Q signals changes the meaning from a statement to a question.  

One things hams are called upon to do from time to time is to provide emergency or special event
communications.  Many things are needed to successfully complete these ventures.  If you're using a
hand held radio, having a spare battery pack or two is a great idea.  Also using a portable antenna
increases your HT's efficiency over the rubber duck antenna that is standard.  Keeping an external
antenna, several feet of connecting cable (feedline), cable and clips for connection to an external
battery and a listing of repeater and net frequencies in your area are very useful additions to your TO
GO pack.  Also, if your operations will be in a noisy environment, a combination headset/microphone
would be a good addition.

One of the games hams play is called foxhunting (hidden transmitter hunting) or Dfing (direction
finding).  The techniques used here are the same when trying to locate noise interference or even
intentional jamming.  A directional antenna is a most useful device for these ventures.  Another
popular activity is called contesting.  These are organized events that put many stations as possible on
during a specified period of time.  Contests can help you develop that HF ear, the ability to pick
signals out of the noise, help improve the efficiency of your station by exposing strong and weak
points in your antenna system, and meet some of the best operators in amateur radio.  Some of the
contest exchanges require you to send and receive grid squares.  A grid square is a letter-number
designator assigned to a geographic location.  Another fun and informative operation is a special event
station.  These are temporary stations that operate in conjunction with an activity of special
significance, such as the Ky Derby, Dayton Hanvention etc.  Usually the sponsoring group offers a
special QSL card or certificate for the contacts.

Another fun aspect of amateur radio is the use of RC (radio control) of aircraft, boats, cars etc.  A
maximum of 25 watts is allowable to transmit telecommand controls.  No on air ID is required,
however a label indicating the licensees callsign and address must be affixed to the transmitter.

Did you know that ham radio operators build and launch satellites.  They're whizzing overhead as we
speak and hams are communicating through them.  Any ham can operate on any satellite providing
your license class allows you to operate on the UPlink frequency.  Satellites are sensitive to power use
so you should use the minimum amount of power necessary to complete the contact.  Not only is that
good for the satellite, it's also one of our rules.  And there are hams from other countries that you can
talk with through satellites.  There are even hams on the space shuttle and any technician class
operator or higher may talk to the shuttle astronauts.  Satellite also transmit beacons.  These contain
information about the satellite.  The easiest way to determine when you can access an amateur satellite
is to use a satellite tracking program.  One of the unusual things about communicating through
satellites is doppler shift. Doppler is a change in frequency caused by motion through space.  AMSAT
is the name of the group that coordinates the building and/or launch of the majority of amateur
satellites.  Satellites are not in use in all parts of the amateur spectrum.  They are limited to subbands
(a portion of the band where satellite operation is permitted) For instance in the 70cm band the
subband is 435-438 MHz.  One of the fastest satellites whizzing around are called LEO's (low earth
orbit)

While we get to play on the radio most of the time, a big reason we exist is to provide emergency and
public service communications.  The FCC will occasionally issue a temporary state of
communications emergency declaration. This is the legal requirement to restrict a freuency for
emergency use only.   These contain any special conditions and rules to be observed during the
emergency.  As an amateur operator you should avoid these special frequencies until the emergency is
over, unless of course you are participating in the emergency operation. You can even contact stations
that are not amateur operators during an emergency or when specially authorized by the FCC.  You
may even be talking to someone and an emergency break into your conversation.  You should
immediately stop your conversation and take the emergency call. Remember though that no one has
exclusive right to any frequency unless the FCC says so.  In a long term emergency, like a hurricane or
tornado, you can even use 'tactical' callsigns.  You might be Hospital One or Rescue Three.  This is
more efficient and helps coordinate public service.  MAYDAY repeated 3 times is the correct way to
transmit for an emergency.  If you hear an emergency call you should assume it is real and act
accordingly.  Making a false emergency call is no laughing matter either.  You could have your license
revoked, fined a large sum of money or be sent to prison and possibly all three.  Remember,
EMERGENCY communications always have priority in the amateur radio service and you may only
transmit SOS or MAYDAY when there is an immediate threat to human life or property.

Hams are called many times to serve others in emergencies.  It's a main reason we exist as a service. 
You should be 'ready' to go if needed.  You should check at least twice a year to make sure you have
all of your emergency response gear and you know where it is.  You should have a way to run your
gear in case of a power failure in your area and you should participate in drills that test your ability to
set up and operate in the field.  Remember also no idle chatter on the emergnecy frequency.  This may
interfere with important traffic.

There are two main amateur organizations that operate during emergency.  The first is RACES (Radio
Amateur Civil Emergency Service).  There are restricted to serving local, state or federal emergency
management agencies.  To operate with a RACES unit you must register with the responsible civil
defense organization. The other is ARES (Amateur Radio Emergency Service) and this group supports
agencies such as Red Cross, Salvation Army and the National Weather Service.  

Being prepared sometimes means being creative.  You might have to use the battery in your truck, a
bicycle generator or portable solar panel for power.  Lastly remember you can operate on any
frequency, in any service in a genuine emergency.  During emergencies you will get all kinds of
requests.  For instance if a reporter asks you to use your equipment to make a news broadcast you
should politely advise him that FCC rules prohibit such use.  Some equipment can be modified to
operate places not originally designed.  These devices are not type accepted by the FCC and cannot be
legally used on other frequencies.  However, in a genuine emergency you may use any means at your
disposal to call for help on any frequency.

Organized groups of amateurs on a particular frequency is referred to as a net.  Emergency traffic
always has priority on a net.  Once you have checked into the net you should not transmit again unless
called by net control or you have emergency traffic.  You should NEVER transmit personal
information concerning victims over the air.  When passing emergency traffic you should always
include the name of the person originating the message.  If you need to 'hide' information from casual
listenners you can pass the traffic using non-voice modes such as packet or morse code.  The net
control station should have a strong and clear signal.  If someone breaks into the net with emergency
traffic the net control station should stop all net activity until the emergency is handled.  If you happen
to be 'first on the scene' of a large scale emergency and no net control station is available you should
immediately open the emergency frequency and begin taking checkins. until a stronger station can act
as net control.   Messages are formatted to facilitate movement and reduce errors.  The preamble is the
information needed to track the message through the amateur traffic handling system.  The check is a
count of the number of words in the message.  It is highly recommended that the text of an emergency
message never exceed 25 words.

Of course we can't communicate without antennas.  One of the antennas hams use is called a beam
antenna.  It concentrates signals in one direction. Other examples of directional antennas are the dish,
quad and yagi.  Another very common antenna is a vertical.  It is a single element mounted
perpendicular to the earths surface.  A simple dipole antenna is an example of a horizontal antenna. 
And of course the larger the antenna the better.  The 'rubber duck' antenna so common on HT's does
not transmit or receive as effectively as a full sized antenna.  The duck is also 10 to 20 times weaker
when used inside a car as when standing outside.  A good antenna to use on your car is a magnetic
mount antenna.  It can be easily removed and installed.  A 1/4 wave antenna for 146 MHz is only 19
inches long.  A 6 meter dipole is approximately 112 inches long.

Dipoles are probably the most common antenna for HF.  As the frequency in use increases the size of
the dipole shortens.  Another vertical antenna in use is the 5/8 wave vertical.  It has a small advantage
over the 1/4 wave by concentrating the radiation pattern at a lower angle.  One very important station
feature is the dummy load.  It reduces on the air interference when conducting tests or tuning up older
tube type gear.

The earth helps our signals propagate.  VHF/UHF signals are not normally heard over long distances
because the ionosphere usually does not reflect these signals.  However occasionally you will hear
some sporadic E reflection.  We also deal with a thing called the radio horizon.  This is the point that
the signals between two points are blocked by the curvature of the earth.  VHF/UHF signals are in
constant use around us.  Occasionally your receiver may make weird noises, such as burst of tones or
fragments of different conversations.  These are caused by strong signals overloading your receiver. 
Also if you're talking with someone on your HT and your signals were clear but now are weak or
distorted, you may be a victim of multipath fading.  Moving a few feet usually will clear up the issue. 
And believe it or not UHF works better in an urban environment than do the longer wavelength VHF
signals.  The shorter UHF signals more easily penetrate urban areas and buildings.

HT's use vertical antennas and so do repeaters.  If you're trying to reach that distant repeater trying to
keep your HT antenna as vertical as possible will help you make the trip.  Polarity of antennas is very
important at UHF/VHF.  If antennas are of opposite polarity on a line of sight communication, signal
strengths could be 100 times weaker.  Another trick when your signals are blocked by buildings or
terrain is to use a directional antenna, like a yagi or dish and find a place where you can reflect a signal
into the repeater.  Quite often you'll hear a rapid fluttering sound on mobile signals.  We refer to this
as picket fencing.  One last note, VHF/UHF waves travel about 1/3 further than the earths curvature
should allow.  For some reason the earths atmosphere seems less curved to radio waves than to light.

You'll hear many terms bantered around in amateur radio.  One of the most misunderstood is SWR
(standing wave ratio).  This is simply a measure of how well a load is matched to a transmitter.  A 1 to
1 ratio indicates a perfect match.  If you notice erratic changes in the SWR readings it may indicate a
loose connection in your antenna or feedline.  Solid state gear is much more susceptible to SWR issues
than the good old tube gear of the day.  The protection circuits in solid state gear usually engage at a
readiong of 2 to 1 or higher.  A directional wattmeter (a meter that shows forward and reflected
power) is a good alternative to use if an SWR meter is not available. Remember though all that energy
is used somewhere.  The energy reflected is wasted as heat in the feedline.  Coaxial cable is the most
common feedline in use today because it requires few special installation considerations and is easy to
use.  It is important to maintain a match between cable and load to allow the efficient transfer of
power and to reduce losses.  Also protect your coax from water.  The leading cause of coaxial cable
failure is moisture contamination. Most coax in use in the amateur service is 50 ohms and has a black
outer covering.  This protects the coax from ultraviolet light damage.  Sun and water can cause
significant losses in coax over the years.  

We are dealing with electricity and as such need to be aware of the many safegaurds necessary to stay
healthy and alive.  The most commonly accepted value for the lowest voltage that can cause a
dangerous electric shock is only 30 volts.  The lowest amount of current running through the human
body that can cause death is only 100 milliamps.

So hooking things up correctly and the same everytime will help keep electricity where it belongs.  On
a three wire electrical plug the green wire is connected to ground.  Remember green fro grass.  We use
fuses in circuits to interrupt power in case of an overload, to protect equipment and to prevent things
such as fires.  If you were to replace a 5 amp fuse with a 20 amp the resulting excess current could
cause enough heat to catch fire.  A great way to prevent electrical shock at your station is to use 3 ire
cords and plus for all AC powered equipment, connect all AC powered station equipment to a
common ground and use a ground fault interrupter at each electrical circuit.  A last safeguard is an
emergency disconnect switch.  The most important thing about this switch is that everyone needs to
know where it is and how to use it.

One of the leading causes of equipment damage and fire is lightning.  Precautions that can be taken are
to disconnect antenna cables from the station and move them away from equipment, unplug all power
cords from AC outlets and stop using your radio equipment and move to another room until the storm
passes. The most important reason for a lightning protection system is to prevent fire.

One of the backup means to power your station is a 12 V battery.  But how do I charge my battery if
the power is out.  One way is to connect your battery to your car battery with jumper cables and run
your car engine.  Special considerations are needed though when dealing with batteries in the house. 
They contain dangerous acids that can spill and cause injury, short circuits can damage wiring and
possibly cause a fire, and explosive gases can form if not properly vented.  You also need to consider
the proper discharge rate of the battery.  If the battery is discharged too quickly it can overheat and
give off a dangerous gas, or possibly explode.

Power supplies are to be respected as well.  They can hold a large charge for quite a while after being
unplugged.  You can receive quite the electric shock from the stored charge in large capacitors.

Antennas need to be high and clear to work their best.  So as hams many of us put up towers.  You
should always wear a hardhat when around the base of the tower, just in case something falls from the
worker above.  You should always wear safety goggles and a safety belt when climbing a tower.  Be
sure these are in place and secured before you climb.  You should also arrange for a helper or
observer, inspect the tower for damage or loose hardware and make sure there are no electrical storms
nearby.  You should make certain your tower remains clear of any overhear power lines and if you
have an airport nearby, be certain that your tower height meets the requirements for proximity to an
airport.  When your antennas are installed they should be where no one can accidentally come into
contact with it.  Guy wires should be installed per the tower manufacturers instructions.  If you have
power lines in the area the tower should be constructed so that if it fell it would come no closer than
10 feet from the power line.  Your tower should be adequately grounded.  A suitable ground is
considered one 8 foot ground rod for each leg, bonded to the tower and to each other.  You should
never climb a crank up tower unless it is fully lowered.  And use stainless steel parts.  They are less
likely to corrode than other common metals.